one of the things I wanted to ask you
for example is that I know there's I
know this isn't your air of specialty
but any light you could shed on it would
be uh um appreciated I've heard that the
the new telescopes which can see farther
into space than anything we've managed
before and farther back into time
therefore have put some wobbles in the
what was almost Universal acceptance of
the theory of the big bang and so can
you clue us in a little bit about at
least what's going on
in astrophysics with regards to that
sure debate so we have this telescope
that was launched two years ago the
James web Space Telescope is the most
powerful instrument we have right now
for peering back into the far reaches of
the universe and thus therefore into the
past because of course something that's
very far away from us it takes a long
time for that light to travel and so
essentially the light we are seeing from
some of these objects is over 13 billion
years old and thus we are seeing the
universe in its first few hundred
million years when we look looking at
the universe at this very ancient
primordial phase we are surprised to see
Rich structures like fairly mature
looking galaxies they're still nothing
as mature as what we have like the Milky
Way but surprisingly mature given the
Epic we are looking at in our data and
similarly for large black holes as well
we seeing black holes more massive than
we would expect in the center of some of
those uh galaxies so the puzzle has been
how how do you build this stuff fast
enough
obviously um you could argue that maybe
you need to totally rip up the textbook
and say you know all of our cosmological
models are wrong and including the Big
Bang we need to change everything I
don't think most astronomers are quite
ready to rip up the textbook I think
there are other ways to explain what we
are seeing without going quite so
drastically um what speaking with my
colleagues about this we a wonderful
colloquium and I was speaking to the uh
some my colleagues about making sense to
this and there was uh one of the
interesting things I took away from that
was the models of star formation that we
apply are calibrated to the local
universe and they may not be actually
applicable to this earliest Epoch so
when we see these uh galaxies these
ancient galaxies we are basically saying
there are too many stars it built stars
and and and too much stuff faster than
it should have done based off the rates
at which we think Stars can form but
really the rates at which we think Stars
can form is calibrated to what we see
around us now which is is not
necessarily representative of the
conditions well certainly cannot be
representative of the conditions of the
early universe and in fact when they've
gone back and Revis those models and
they've updated them to account for the
much stronger star formation and more
intense densities that they naturally
have in these early epics it actually
does predict these galaxies in a large
most of the galaxies we see so um in
fact we could have predicted many of
these galaxies had we just been maybe a
little bit more thoughtful about what we
put into the physics of those models in
the first place but it did make of
course a spectacular headline to claim
that the Big Bang model was wrong I
don't want to totally dismiss it but
there there's still challenges but I
don't think it's quite as dramatic as
has been portrayed I see I see so part
of the problem there too was the
extension of that principle of
homogeneity or uniformity in the
temporal domain when it wasn't
appropriate as you said if the
conditions well the conditions are
obviously different soon after the big
bang clearly and the so then the
question would be well how consequential
are those differences and your argument
is the magnitude of those differences
was conservatively underestimated and
that's cast some of the theory into
disrepute but that doesn't mean that at
least in your estimation that the baby
has to be thrown out with the bath yeah
I think if you throw out all of you know
the Big Bang model which really when we
say the big model we don't really just
mean the big bang what we call is Lambda
CDM which means Lambda is dark energy
CDM stands for cold dark matter and this
you can think of Landa CDM as
essentially the standard model of
astronomy in the same way there a
standard model of particle physics that
includes the basic fundamental particles
we have a standard model of astronomy
and cosmology and so this model has been
extraordinarily successful as indeed has
the standard model in in particle
physics it explains such a wide span of
observations that were you to throw it
out it would it would be extremely
difficult to understand how it could
coincidentally explains such a vast
array of diverse phenomena so exquisitly
so I think we we're not you know
astronomers do like it physicists like
it when we get to rip things up but
given the extraordinary success of the
model and this you know one interesting
puzzle I don't think we're quite ready
to throw in the towel at the first punch
you know we we're willing to fight back
a little bit I think it was AR I think
it was Arthur C Clark possibly I might
be wrong about this who no it was Carl
Sean who said that extraordinar claim
claim extraordinary claims require
extraordinary evidence and so the well
the proper response to that is that you
always modify your theory no more
dramatically than is minimally necessary
right that's that's the of it's just
otherwise that's true even
psychologically you know um if you don't
every time you're upset with your wife
you don't think that now divorce is in
the offing right that's just not the
solution to the problem
[Music]